1. Why Linux?
	Pros:
		Open source.
		Secure.
	Cons:
		Not Ease of use.

2. Linux Architecture:
	
	layer of Linux Architecture
		
		1. User Application : example-> note++, nudi, installed application for user.
		2. System Utilities : example-> Copy, move, open. inbuilt utils for small operartions
		3. System Libraries : example-> Env libraries of the respective lang, example, C programming libraries like Print and all.
		4. kernal			: example-> main operator, which maintain process, memory, network etc management handles the connection b/w user app, sys utilis &
										sys libraries to next layer that is Hardware and decide how much cpu n memo.
		5. Hardware			: example-> Ram as process, hardisk as memory and network and other things are handles here in the hardware based on above layers
		

3. Private and Public Key to access the Linux (Secure way of access)
	
	Why? 
		username and password method is not secure for multi users so we are going to use private and public key
	
	Public Key:
		kept and stored in the linux machine.
	privae key: 
		the private key is with respective user that can be able to access the linux as a user.

4. Ports:
	are the networkal way of accessing/expose the linux machine.
	
	Linux have the Ip adrres to access/expose 
		public Ip 	: 	outside the Linux
		private Ip 	: 	Inside the Linux
	
	HERE BASICALLY LINUX ACCES/EXPOSE WLL BE SECURED BASED ON THE "INBOUND AND OUTBOUND " RULES
	
	Outbound rules	: 0.0.0.0/0
	Inbound rules 	: 22-ssh, 80-http ,443-https, 3000 to 10000- ,ost of the devops work : These are the port
	Source 			: From where the access is allowed ? for ex : vpn like that
	
	Access :
		Public_IP.Ports : To access the applications installed in the linux.
	expose :
		Linux will acces the word through network.
		
5. Linux Folder Structure
	
6. Linux Basic cmds: 
	
		basic: 
			cd, pwd, ls-listing, mv-rename,cp- copy, mkdir- create folder,touch-create file, rm-remove, rm -r - recursively delete/remove.
		operations:
			cat filename-content of file.
			vim filename-edit file.
			i will enable the insert mode.
			esc+:wq saves the edited file.
			
		
7. Linux root user and user level of access:
	
	Root: have all the permision to access 
	user: needs to use the Sudo.

8. User management in linux.
	to check the users in the machine.
		path: cd/etc/cat passwd
	
	create user :Sudo useradd vishwa / sudo adduser Vishwa(userfriendly cmd)
		
				 useradd : shell bcm the terminnal but when add user is used bash will be terminnal
	
	Switch User : su -xyz .
	
	
	
	